I. Compensation and Benefits.

Often also referred to as “Total Rewards”, the practice of Compensation involves the development of the total pay, incentives, and benefits packages that employees receive in return for their service to an organization.  This body of work involves the following (and more):
* Base pay (including overtime)
* Incentive Pay (Organizational, Sales, Executive, Piecework, Pay-for-Performance)
* Differential Pay (e.g. Skills-based pay, Shift Differential, Hazardous Duty, or Working Holiday Pay)
* Health Benefits
* Paid Time Off Benefits (Vacation, Jury Duty, Funeral Leave, Holiday Pay)
* Unpaid Time Off Benefits (Personal days, FMLA)
* Severance (if applicable)
* Retirement (Pension & 401-K)

Why engage in the practice of compensation?  Employees need to feel like they shouldn’t have to question whether their pay is fair and equitable compared to others who are doing similar work with like qualifications.  This can lead to employee unhappiness, turnover, or charges that any different treatment is due to a protected-class status.  

In some cases, compensation and benefits are bargained collectively through a third party (see Chapter II, Industrial and Labor Relations).  In most other cases, base and possibly incentive pay is negotiated individually at the time of hire or internal promotion, and the benefits package is consistently applied to all employees in accordance with government guidelines for benefits plans or their taxation.  The most commonly applied of these statutes is ERISA (the Employee Retirement and Income Security Act of 1974).  ERISA does not require that an employer maintain a pension plan; however, it does regulate its provisions if an employer does have one.  The same concept applies for any program developed by the employer within ERISA guidelines.


A.  Base Pay
Employers perform compensation studies on base pay to determine whether pay conforms to market guidelines for similar work, and other jobs that require similar knowledge, skills, and abilities (referred to as ksa’s) to the position in question.   Jobs are typically banded or placed in a level structure to allow better manageability of the benchmarking to market-based studies.  
A benchmark study typically is done by an external firm or collection of firms to identify jobs by title, scope, organizational level, size of organization, ksa’s, and other factors within a geographical region or company type.  These studies will associate a job to a market value for that job, and will also typically identify the range of statistical high to low of the pay rates.  
What is appropriate and fair pay for a particular job?  Most employers will perform a market analysis for the job.  
* First, collect two or more benchmark studies to provide a market-based high and low points for the salary range.  If a specific market value is not specified, practice is to add the high and low and divide by two to establish a market value.
* If the market values identified by the benchmark studies are within 10% of one another, average them.  If not, get another benchmark study for comparison.  Repeat this process until you have representative studies close to one another.
* Check cost of living indexes or other adjustment factors for the particular location of the position.  One source of this and other employment index data is the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) website.  Adjust the market value if necessary.
* Most compensation practitioners consider a job to be appropriately compensated if the pay is between 80% and 120% of the market value of the job.  Simply divide the job’s pay by the market value and multiply by 100 to get the % market value (%MV).  
* If the job is not, appropriate remedy may need to take place, which is called an equity adjustment.  Equity adjustments are sometimes carried out over a period of time or at the time of the next scheduled increase.
Another adjustment commonly performed to base pay is the Annual Merit Increase.  This is a practice of establishing an adjustment to pay for an entire group of employees (or the entire firm) based on performance evaluation of each individual.  Evaluations are ranked from high to low, identifying directionally which employees should receive the highest pay increases as a percent of current base salary, and then is adjusted based on what pay the individual receives as a % of market value.  Therefore, high-performing employees at lower rates of pay would normally receive the greatest increase, and higher-pay employees at lower performance levels would receive the lowest increase (again, as a % of current base salary).  A representative grid would look something like this:

Example of a market value - performance matrix

% MVPerf BelowPerf Mid-LowPerf AvgPerf Mid-HiPerf Hi<80%4.0%5.0%6.0%7.0%8.0%80-90%3.0%3.5%4.0%5.0%6.0%90-105%2.0%2.5%3.0%3.5%4.0%105-120%1.0%2.0%2.5%3.0%3.5%>120%0.0%0.5% Lump1.0% Lump2.0% Lump2.5% Lump
“Lump” sums are a way to provide a higher-pay individual with the money that he/she would otherwise have received as a single check without adjusting the base pay.  That way, high-pay individuals do not continue to outpace the population as their base pay escalates.   Also, as you can see, average performance for individuals right at market value (90-105%) provides the base average percentage payroll increase target.  Depending on the actual makeup of your population, however (how many individuals are in each section of the above grid), the actual effect on payroll (EOP) may be different, and compensation individuals are normally expected to provide a realistic perspective on the actual EOP as part of the budgeting process.  For the past several years, national EOP rates have been averaging in the 3.0% range and with currently low inflation that trend is expected to continue.  

B. Incentive Pay.
Incentive pay is typically designed to do just that: as an incentive to encourage employees to reach specific goals or results.  The most common form is commission for sales workers, which is often a certain payout based on reaching previously established sales goals or targets.  The payout may be based on one metric (i.e. overall sales dollars achieved) or a composite (minimum sales quota plus priority products sold by quantity).  Sometimes the commission is capped (maximum amount achievable per time period), sometimes it may be increased by category to direct sales behavior toward a particular product or profit area.  Nonetheless, because increasing sales volume normally drives increasing profits for the business, sales jobs with a good incentive plan often become the source of high pay for the individuals.
Other incentives are benefits provided by the business to encourage overall business performance or the improved output in a particular business area.  Personal incentives include piecework systems, where an employee makes a particular rate of pay that is augmented by the number of units of output from this employee’s area (e.g. $8 per hour plus $0.15 per unit of output).  Some technical environments consider pay for skills plans, which provide a base pay to employees plus an additional value for each skill that she is certified to hold.  Group or organization incentives are often tied to base pay as a percentage; that is, if the organization has a maximum performance the incentive is 10% of base pay, average performance = 5%, and poor performance = 0.  These would of course be payable following finalizing the performance measures for the period.  It is very typical for management to have a plan like this, with higher level jobs having a higher percentage of “pay at risk”, based on the potentially fluctuating performance levels of the business.  
As a real life explanation, let’s say that you have incentive plan opportunities based on your favorite football team.  A piecework plan would pay out a dollar for every point scored, and add it to your paycheck.  From a pay for skills plan, a team demonstrating that they can average over 200 yards running and 250 yards passing would earn a higher rate of pay for plan participants.  A commission plan would pay out $10 for every game won after the third win, and a management incentive plan would pay out $100 if they win the division championship and $500 if they win the Super Bowl.  You can see that piecework pays regardless of whether the team wins or loses, so little pay at risk.  Similarly, a pay for skills plan pays given that the team has demonstrated the capability of winning, but doesn’t consider whether they actually win or not.  Commission drives partial results, the actual win of the game(s) above a minimum quota, yet doesn’t really factor whether the team is successful in the league.  Management incentive is purely based on specific results measures established prior to the start of the season, and only pays out if those measures are reached.  A number of plans mix multiple factors; in this example, we could say that the management incentive plan pays out $10 per win over 50% plus an extra bonus for winning the division championship or the super bowl.  Or, they may look at long term performance and say that the 2nd consecutive division championship is doubled.  Hybrid plans like this strive to meet multiple goals within the same incentive structure.  
C.  Differential Pay.
Differential pay will typically provide a variation to the base pay for an individual for holding a specific job or performing a duty outside the everyday basis of the job.  Common examples are shift differential, an hourly “adder” on the base pay of the individual for working 2nd or 3rd shift, hazardous duty pay for individuals working in dangerous work areas or conditions, working holiday pay for an individual working during a declared work holiday, and progression rates that start an individual at a lower rate of pay and then escalate over time intervals to the stated base pay of the position (sometimes as much as 4 years).  Differential pay is often added in individual blocks on top of one another; for example, an individual midway through the progression cycle may be working a hazardous job on an off-shift during a holiday weekend and receive pay adjustments for each of those items.  
From time to time a company may find themselves in economic crisis and be forced to renegotiate a standing labor contract or adjust employees rates of pay.  In these cases it is typical for an arrangement to be made to “grandfather” individuals hired prior to a particular date at the “old” rate, and then pay all individuals hired after that date at the “new” rate.  Therefore, you may wind up with two or more different rates for the same thing: we may agree that all employees hired before this August will continue to get paid $.25 per hour for 2nd shift jobs, but all employees hired after August 1st will receive $.15 per hour for 2nd shift jobs.  Grandfathering allows both the company and the union to maintain the integrity regarding a commitment to the employees to pay them the rate for which they were hired, yet communicate an understanding to all new employees that the new rate will be a different number.  Therefore there are no perceived “takeaways”.

D. Health and Welfare Benefits. 
Companies create plans to provide health benefits for employees to help soften the impact of the health care system on the individual employee, and provide some measure of economic protection should a major health crisis arise.  Typical elements of these types of plans include major medical, wellness, dental, prescription drug, and vision plans.  As of this writing, over 95% of companies provide most of these programs for full time active employees.  The intervention of the federal government into health care insurance systems and the instability of the health care system overall will undoubtedly change the business world’s perspective on providing these kinds of benefits.  Companies are currently moving away from retiree medical plans, spousal coverage particularly when employed with another firm with available benefits, vision and dental plans, and even prescription drug coverage.  This area will change in the near future.

E. Paid and Unpaid Time-Off Benefits.
Employers provide time away from work as a benefit to employees.  Most commonly practiced are holiday and vacation time; many firms have 10-13 holidays per year plus a vacation schedule that often begins at 2 or 3 weeks and will go up to a normal maximum of no higher than 6.  Firms will state the pay benefit in the employee handbook or policy guide but regular practice is that a holiday is 8 straight-time hours pay and a vacation week is 5 days’ straight-8 pay.  
Other provisions include time off for sickness, funeral or bereavement, jury duty, or mandatory obligations such as FMLA or military service.  Some are paid and some unpaid, depending on the benefits package chosen by the employer.  An increasing number of companies are leaning toward a PTO bank – Paid Time Off for all these provisions (some exclude holidays) rolled up into one annual benefit per employee for a certain number of days off regardless of reason.  The argument is that it’s easier to manage, since you’re managing to one certain number of days or hours per employee; the counter argument is that you’re effectively guaranteeing that all of these days will be used up by employees who count and watch their individual benefits, whereas before it’s possible that some may have not been used (sick days, for example).  

From a management perspective, in many cases it’s important to know that your business is populated by the right set of skills to be able to properly perform work.  If the only Notary Public in your business is out for an extended illness or vacation, it’s prudent to ensure there is another way to staff this skill during the absence.  Many companies establish a skills / training matrix as a way to verify who has been certified in a skill and who may be qualified to act as a backup.  This skills / training matrix can be used as a tool in comparison to the absence / PTO calendar to confirm what skills need to be updated and when.  More about the skills / training matrix in an upcoming section on Training and Development. 

F. Severance.
Companies are not normally compelled by either State or Federal law to provide any form of severance or separation pay, especially in the case of terminations for just cause.  However, it is common practice for organizations to provide some form of severance, particularly in return for an agreement by the individual that he or she will not seek legal action against the company as in a lawsuit for wrongful termination under a protected class statute.  It is also common to provide severance for displaced individuals impacted in a restructuring / downsizing or facility closure.  Typical severance packages are based on years of active service with the firm, such as two week’s pay for every year of service up to a maximum of one year.  

Depending on the type and reason for departure, companies may also offer outplacement services, a unique niche of the Human Resources practice world that focuses on successful transition of individuals from current employment to the next career opportunity.  Outplacement firms are hired by the current employer to help train the impacted individual in job searches, resume writing, interviewing skills, and transition practices to improve the chances of finding a new position in a reasonable time frame.  One of the largest and most successful of all of the outplacement services firms is Lee Hecht Harrison, a worldwide leader and transition and consulting services.  

Sometimes firms also find themselves in the position of offering retention bonuses, an agreement with an employee to work to a certain date in return for a particular pay benefit.  For example, a plant closure that will take up to a year to complete may offer four months’ pay in addition to severance for any employee that works up until the actual date of closure.  This is often done because once a closure is announced, management knows that it is unlikely they will get any new hires to replace departing individuals so the best solution is to make an agreement to try to retain existing staff as long as possible.  

G. Retirement.  
Employer pension plans formerly were a staple of the benefits package.  However, in recent years, employers have begun a process of providing new hires a 401-K plan, typically a mutual-fund retirement program run by an outside firm that has tax deductions for the participant and a matching contribution up to a certain percentage.  Management fees are often a small percentage of the investment return of the participants, making 401-K’s inexpensive for the employer, and with the tax deductions and employer match, they have benefit to the participant.  401-K’s also have the added value of portability, which means that an employee may leave this current employment and “roll over” the 401-K value to another 401-K or qualified IRA plan without jeopardizing the tax benefit.  This can allow employees with multiple 401-K plans to consolidate her holdings into a single plan for retirement preparation purposes; this is something not typically available under employer plans without significant penalty.
Additionally, retiree medical plans have become increasingly expensive and unpredictable, and employers have been getting away from them in favor of having employees go directly to government sponsored plans (Medicare).  While many employees still have grandfathering provisions to retain some portion of retiree medical, it is expected that at some point in the future these plans will largely be eliminated.  

